---
layout: post
title: "Features and subtasks"
subtitle: "Sample subtitle"
date: 2022-09-10 18:00:00
background: '/img/maths_background.png'
author: "Timothy Gowers"
mathjax: true
---

## Using features of a problem state to choose appropriate moves.

In this post, I assume that the reader is broadly familiar with what a problem state is and with how move types can be used to transform one problem state into another. An introduction to these concepts can be found <a href="https://wtgowers.github.io/human-style-atp/2022/09/09/basicalgorithm.html">in the previous post to this one</a>.

The algorithm described (not with full precision) in that post was quite crude in the sense that it used a _waterfall architecture_, meaning that one fixes an order of priority for the move types and simply "cascades" down the list until one finds a move type that can be applied to the problem state. In particular, if more than one move was possible, the choice made by the program did not depend on the problem state. It is a surprising fact that an algorithm of this kind can solve some not completely trivial problems. 

However, it also fails on problems that ought to be easy, and it seems that allowing the choice of moves to be guided by suitable features of the problem state, and by suitably chosen intermediate subgoals (such as, for example, obtaining additional information about some term that has arisen naturally, even if one does not know precisely what that information will be or how it will be used) has the potential to increase the power of the program very substantially. At the time of writing, we are working on a "second-generation" program of that type, which we hope will provide a proof of principle to back up this claim. 

Here I shall work through an example in order to illustrate the kind of problem for which the basic waterfall architecture gets rapidly stuck, but a program guided by features and subgoals will probably be able to find a solution. Since the word "subgoal" is used for several purposes already in automatic theorem proving, we shall use the word "subtask" instead, even though "subgoal" probably captures the meaning better.

## If $f(\overline A)\subset\overline{f(A)}$ for every set $A$, then $f$ is continuous.

This is a slightly tricky problem, so let me begin by writing out a conventional proof.

**Proposition.** *Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces and let $f:X\to Y$ be a function such that $f(\overline A)\subset\overline{f(A)}$ for every subset $A\subset X$. Then $f$ is continuous.*

**Proof.** Let $B$ be a closed subset of $Y$. We would like to show that $f^{-1}(B)$ is closed in $X$. For this it is sufficient to prove that $\overline{f^{-1}(B)}\subset f^{-1}(B)$. By hypothesis, we know that $f(\overline{f^{-1}(B)})\subset\overline{f(f^{-1}(B))}$. But $f(f^{-1}(B)\subset B$, and the operation of taking the closure is monotone, so $\overline{f(f^{-1}(B))}\subset\overline{B}$. Since $B$ is closed, $\overline B=B$. By transitivity of set inclusion, we find that $f(\overline{f^{-1}(B)})\subset B$, which implies that $\overline{f^{-1}(B)}\subset f^{-1}(B)$ as desired. $\square$
