---
layout: post
title: "Features and subtasks"
subtitle: "Sample subtitle"
date: 2022-09-09 17:00:00
background: '/img/maths_background.png'
author: "Timothy Gowers"
mathjax: true
---

## Using features of a problem state to choose appropriate moves.

In this post, I assume that the reader is broadly familiar with what a problem state is and with how move types can be used to transform one problem state into another. An introduction to these concepts can be found <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/2022/09/09/basicalgorithm.html">in the previous post to this one</a>.

The algorithm described (not with full precision) in that post was quite crude in the sense that it used a _waterfall architecture_, meaning that one fixes an order of priority for the move types and simply "cascades" down the list until one finds a move type that can be applied to the problem state. In particular, if more than one move was possible, the choice made by the program did not depend on the problem state. It is a surprising fact that an algorithm of this kind can solve some not completely trivial problems. 

However, it also fails on problems that ought to be easy, and it seems that allowing the choice of moves to be guided by suitable features of the problem state, and by suitably chosen intermediate subgoals (such as, for example, obtaining additional information about some term that has arisen naturally, even if one does not know precisely what that information will be or how it will be used) has the potential to increase the power of the program very substantially. At the time of writing, we are working on a "second-generation" program of that type, which we hope will provide a proof of principle to back up this claim. 

Here I shall work through an example in order to illustrate the kind of problem for which the basic waterfall architecture gets rapidly stuck, but a program guided by features and subgoals will probably be able to find a solution. Since the word "subgoal" is used for several purposes already in automatic theorem proving, we shall use the word "subtask" instead, even though "subgoal" probably captures the meaning better.

## If $f(\overline A)\subset\overline{f(A)}$ for every set $A$, then $f$ is continuous.

This is a slightly tricky problem, so let me begin by writing out a conventional proof.

**Proposition.** *Let* $X$ *and* $Y$ *be topological spaces and let* $f:X\to Y$ *be a function such that* $f(\overline A)\subset\overline{f(A)}$ *for every subset* $A\subset X$. *Then* $f$ *is continuous.*

**Proof.** Let $B$ be a closed subset of $Y$. We would like to show that $f^{-1}(B)$ is closed in $X$. For this it is sufficient to prove that $\overline{f^{-1}(B)}\subset f^{-1}(B)$. By hypothesis, we know that $f(\overline{f^{-1}(B)})\subset\overline{f(f^{-1}(B))}$. But $f(f^{-1}(B)\subset B$, and the operation of taking the closure is monotone, so $\overline{f(f^{-1}(B))}\subset\overline{B}$. Since $B$ is closed, $\overline B=B$. By transitivity of set inclusion, we find that $f(\overline{f^{-1}(B)})\subset B$, which implies that $\overline{f^{-1}(B)}\subset f^{-1}(B)$ as desired. $\square$

For the remainder of this post, I shall present a sequence of moves that get from the initial problem state to TRUE, giving in each case a "motivation" for the move -- that is, pointing to some aspect of the problem state that "improves" when the move is applied. The hope is that these motivations are sufficiently precise that they can be used as the basis for the design of a more powerful algorithm.

Before I start, I want to specify some of the results that I am assuming will be in the library. That is important, because I want to present a high-level proof that uses basic properties of the closure operation rather than a low-level proof that works directly from the definition of the closure of a set as the intersection of all closed sets that contain it. The basic properties I have in mind are things like the following. (I shall state these results informally, but of course they would be represented in a more formal way in the actual library.)

* A set $B$ is closed if and only if $\overline B\subset B$.
* If $B\subset C$, then $\overline B\subset\overline C$.
* If $B\subset C$ and $C$ is closed, then $\overline B\subset C$.

I will also make use of various basic set-theoretic facts about images and inverse images. 

* If $B\subset C$, then $f^{-1}(B)\subset f^{-1}(C)$.
* If $B\subset C$, then $f(B)\subset f(C)$.
* $f(f^{-1}(B)\subset B)$.

Finally, another result that plays an important role is the "non-standard" expansion of "is_continuous" given by the following equivalent definition.

* A function $f:X\to Y$ is *continuous* if the inverse image of every closed subset of $Y$ is closed in $X$. 

Now let us write down in tableau form a suitable initial problem state.

$$
\begin{array}{|c|}
\hline
X: \text{topological space}\\
Y: \text{topological space}\\
f:X\to Y\\
\hline
\\
\hline
\forall A\subset X\ f(\overline{A})\subset\overline{f(A)}\\
\hline
\\
\hline
\text{is}\mathtt{_}\text{continuous}(f)\\
\hline
\end{array}
$$

It is far from obvious at this stage how to use the hypothesis, but it is premature to turn $A$ into a metavariable, since there is not yet any hint of a subset of $X$, and turning $A$ into a metavariable doesn't help us do anything. Instead, there's an obvious move, which is to expand the definition of continuity. Furthermore, this does something very good for us -- it creates a subset of $X$!

That said, there's a very interesting issue that arises, which is that if we expand the definition in the obvious way using open sets, we end up with a subset of $X$ that is of no use to us. What makes this interesting is that many a human mathematician would not realize this until they had tried out the open-sets expansion and got stuck, and even then it might well feel like an "Aha!" moment. (Whether or not it did so would depend on the experience of the mathematician in question.)

Nevertheless, it is not all that hard to justify choosing the closed-sets definition. Indeed, the hypothesis is about closures, and closures are to do with closed sets, so there is more of a chance of a good match between hypothesis and target if we use the closed-sets definition.

That justification makes good sense in human terms, but it is not completely obvious how to translate it into a general criterion that an algorithm can use. For us, the fact that the words "closure" and "closed" are related probably plays an important role, but it doesn't feel very mathematical to use linguistic relationships like that. More important is that there is a *reason* that the two words are related: the definition of closure and two of the elementary properties listed above mention closed sets and they do not mention open sets. So there's a clear advantage to using the closed-sets definition: not only does it produce a subset of $X$, but we want to prove that that subset is closed, and that potentially relates it to the closure operation. Note that for the program to realize this, it will have to spot that the closure operation is related to closed sets, which means it will have to look into the library and see that it contains statements that involve both the closure operation and the predicate "is closed". 


